---
layout: blog
published: true
title: test
category: blog
language: english
comments: true
tags: 

author: test
affiliation: 
splash: 
youtubeid: 
commit_message: commit message
---
More than [50% of the world’s population](https://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/) - around 3.9 billion people - live in urban areas, yet poverty is mostly rural. In fact, [almost 80% of those living on less than US$2 per day live in rural areas and 63% of the world’s poor work in agriculture](http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/331761468152719470/Implementing-agriculture-for-development-World-Bank-Group-agriculture-action-plan-2013-2015). The Middle East and North Africa region is not an exception. <!-- more -->


However these dynamics are changing and [by 2050 the number of people living in urban areas is expected to rise to 66%](https://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/). Despite this, very little is known about the direct and indirect consequences that these changes will have on our food systems. 
The relationship between urban and rural areas is changing in countries all over the world. Cities are extending into peri-urban and rural areas, further blurring the lines between what was traditionally considered ‘urban’ and ‘rural’. At the same time, many areas previously classified as rural or peri-urban are growing rapidly, often in an unplanned manner, resulting in increased rural-urban linkages. 
**Will an ever increasing number of urban consumers have enough food? Will agricultural production be sufficient to feed everybody? Is the expansion of urban areas threatening crop-land and productivity? What polices are needed to ensure food security and nutrition for all across the rural-urban continuum?**
Answers to these questions are not straightforward. They require us to re-think the nexus between rural and urban areas, socio-economic development and food systems, re-think traditional policy approaches focusing exclusively on urban or rural areas and move towards more integrated planning of rural **and** urban spaces.

Increased rural-urban linkages present multiple opportunities for achieving food security and nutrition in complex and interlinked ways throughout food systems. For example, they can help achieve productivity increases as a result of better access to technology or greater investment; they can generate employment and income generation; and they can facilitate access to more diverse and nutritious products, services and infrastructure. But these dynamics can also work in the opposite direction and result in exacerbating poverty, exclusion and, ultimately, food insecurity and malnutrition.